---
Title: On Urdu
layout: post
author: AGS
Description: Reiviving Urdu
categories : languages
toc: true
tags: languages
featured: true
image: urdu.jpg
---

From neglect to revival...

### On Urdu - lost and found

Reviving Urdu is a project I took on several years ago. I was realising that, without nourishment, this beautiful tree within me would wither and die. 
 
**ذلت کا گھونٹ**  
*A sip of humiliation.*  


Let me take you back to this scene:  

I’m in the living room, reading aloud short stories from my school books.  
An unfamiliar word.  
I stumble — laughter erupts — another mispronunciation.  

Well, I start seeing the funny side now. Perhaps this is the price paid for neglect, and the price to pay for revival. I realise the new words my mind is grappling with are result of years of neglect. It is trying its best to make sense of the script in front of me. This is the path of relearning and rediscovering Urdu.  

Granted, reading without diacritics (accent marks) was a steep climb when I hadn’t done it in years, and this led to funny pronunciations. Yet it was crucial to get things rolling again.  
The rallying words of Epictetus ring in my ears:  
> “…but if you are conquered by them [teasing], you will incur a double ridicule.”  
> — *Epictetus, Enchiridion*  

To give up because of humiliation and embarrassment — would only increase the pain! It may seem like we are contracting, yet it is the perfect opportunity to expand and grow. Humiliation leads to humility. Acknowledging our current level is part of the process. However, it then leads to joy and fulfilment as we take a deeper dive.



---

### Reasons to persevere

Parts of our identity — race, colour, language — shape our lives.   
I recognised the danger we were in. The danger of losing our identity.   
Of losing touch with ourselves.  

I had completed my education up to Year 5 in Urdu, after which it was only informal learning and speaking at home.   I recognise that stumbling along the way is part of the deal when one embarks on this voyage of language learning.   Still, I am grateful for this — it allowed me to keep practising Urdu, and we hadn’t switched completely to English.   This fact kept my mother tongue alive, something I try not to take for granted. It is also a stark reminder that, had household conditions been different, I too might not have retained this ability. It was a gift — a gift to be grateful for.  

For me, language plays a huge part in accessing emotions and speaking from the heart. It is the subtle shifts in melody, rhythm, and tone that can convey so much.  

When I speak in English I often tend to go towards the more analytical and intellectual of myself. Switching to Urdu melts away any pretence and rigidity as I flow into the warmer register of Urdu. The sense of dislocation and alienation melts away as you feel yourself arriving back home.  

Now, I often feel exhaustion if the day only consists of English consumption and conversation. It is the pain of disconnection with a core part of myself.  

The most sublime moments arise from clang words, wordplay, and the general playfulness of the language. Spontaneous poetry can emerge from common conversation.  

I notice the anger, guilt, and pain within myself when I realise how many works I’ve read in English, yet the same cannot be said for Urdu. It hurts, because there is an amazing world of literature out there, waiting to be discovered.  

The intimacy, fulfilment, and inspiration I have felt when engaging with the Urdu are beyond words. It’s easy to keep reading in English, but the challenge — and reward — lie in choosing Urdu. This access comes through effort and persistence.  

---

### What Is Urdu?

The word Urdu comes from the Turkic word *ordu*, meaning “camp” or “army,” indicating its origins.  
It originally meant *zabān-i-urdu* — “the language of the camp.”  

Linguistically, it is an Indo-Aryan language, a descendant of Sanskrit.  
It has been heavily influenced by both Arabic and Farsi in style, vocabulary, and register.  

This fusion allows us to converse with speakers of Hindi and gives us a massive head start in learning Arabic and Farsi.  

Urdu is written in the Perso-Arabic script. I admire the beauty of the script every time I see it. 

It uses the Nastaliq calligraphic style of Farsi, which is similar yet subtly different to the common Naskh script of Arabic.  

Urdu also has a link to English through a common ancestor in Proto-Indo-European.  
There are also many words shared with English (cognates) — *hither, thither, and wither* correspond to *ither, uther, and kither*.  
Words like *cow* relate to گائے, and there are many more examples when we are alert to sound patterns.  

Urdu is also taught in religious institutions as part of Aalim programmes, due to its rich literature and its importance in Islamic scholarship, especially in South Asia.  

Urdu is unique in its flexibility and wordplay. Much of its rhythm comes from the ability to break into spontaneous poetry. Clang words give Urdu its spice and spark. In everyday speech, speakers can add a rhyming word to any part of their speech and have it make sense.  
This gives the language a unique sense of play and humour.

---

### Colonial Past
> “We must at present do our best to form a class who may be interpreters between us and the millions whom we govern; a class of persons, Indian in blood and colour, but English in tastes, in words, in opinions, in morals, and in intellect.”  
> — Thomas Babington Macaulay, *Minute on Indian Education*, 2 February 1835  

This quote shook me to the very core. Stabbed, pierced through the heart — it hurts. 
Seeing Urdu fall out of favour, not spoken in the diaspora as well as among the privileged classes in Pakistan, fills me with sadness. The voices of our ancestors, choked.   
  
There was a systematic attempt during the colonial era to create a class that would think and speak in English.  
Imagine a mask being put on us.  
Schools becoming grey factories.  
Churning out replicas.  

Perhaps it is no longer overt, as its effects can still be felt — still shaping both beliefs and behaviour. I personally know what it’s like to have a heart beat in another tongue.  

Copying the outward forms of another nation often leads to internalising that outlook on life. It is like wearing a set of clothes that don’t quite fit.  
Yet we wear them to supposedly ‘fit in’.  
It may look OK on the outside, but do we really feel authentic on the inside?  

As Muhammad Asad highlighted in *Islam at the Crossroads*, this does not mean judging ourselves or others harshly, but rather seeking forgiveness for not knowing and not understanding the importance of our native language — and acknowledging the harm that ignorance can cause, both to ourselves and to our common language.  

It is easy to be duped into thinking speaking English means that it’s better than the “commoners” who haven’t “evolved” from their native tongue. Yet who has really regressed?  

The moments where I’ve felt the deepest emotions of anger, revulsion, and betrayal are when this happens — when Urdu is rejected in favour of another language, often English.  

Displaying knowledge of English is often seen as a marker of superiority in certain circles.  
Indeed, this may be part of the legacy of colonialism — where aspects of the ruling class were imitated. It is as if donning the clothes of another world could make a person “whiter”. Copying not only in clothing but in custom/language, to be seen as ‘better’ or ‘higher’.  

This thread still runs in our collective psyche, from skin whitening to language choice. What are we trying to scrub away?  

It is crucial that we deal with those parts of ourselves that feel insecurity, inadequacy, and inferiority. These feelings without being acknowledged and processed can mislead us to disowning a core part of ourselves.  

If we are to fully embrace our heritage and our tradition, Urdu and language are key areas where this can take place.  
Even years before this, we as a family were wary of our speech steadily having more English words than Urdu — even where Urdu had adequate and eloquent options.  
Urdu can easily accommodate new words.  

However, the danger lies in English completely crowding out Urdu, or in the decision to drop Urdu entirely and speak only in English instead. This feels like a betrayal of our cultural heritage.  

Without burning any books, the effect of a change in alphabet — as in Turkey during the era of Mustafa Kemal — was immense.  
The Turkish script reform in 1928 latinised Turkish. This cut later generations off from Ottoman-Turkish texts. Large parts of the literary record became less accessible to those educated only in the new script.  

Yet Japan showed that it is possible to compete technologically whilst maintaining its sense of tradition.  
It did this by translating scientific words into its own language, a monumental effort.

---

### Towards revival


**فَاصْبِرْ صَبْرًا جَمِيلًا**  
*"So persevere with a beautiful perseverance." (Qur’an 70:5)*  


However, all is not doom and gloom. Dealing with the grief and missed opportunities has been crucial in my journey of learning and relearning.  
It is our responsibility to choose the path we now wish to take.   It always returns to what is within the sphere of influence — which actions I can take. Just like learning any language, following the comprehensible input concept — reading and listening to texts we enjoy in order to absorb the language — worked and still works well.  

Understanding and integrating those parts of our identity allows us to remain loyal to our core selves. If we are to be considered “other,” why abandon the very parts that make us unique? If we need an interpreter to speak to our own people, how distant would we feel?  
Do we really know ourselves?  

> “O mankind! We created you from a male and a female, and made you into peoples and tribes so that you may know one another.” (Qurʾān 49:13)  


The power rests in our hands — and tongues. Whatever darkness or ignorance seems to prevail, it is a call to action. It is time to take up our arms. I fear what legacy we leave behind and what the next generations will inherit. This fight is not only for Urdu but for all languages facing similar threats of extinction.  

Accessing Iqbal fully may be the goal, but it can start with a simple step. Reading poetry and short stories can revive this love for our language.  

Instilling this sense of wonder, awe, and enthusiasm is the best way to safeguard Urdu’s legacy. The best teachers I have had were those who instilled a love for the subject within me. When we instil love for a subject, we safeguard its legacy — because people want to learn it, rather than feeling they should or seeing it as an imposition.  

Calling relatives and conversing with them is an incredible way to connect with our wider family — and to have heart-to-heart conversations.   We may even pick up a few words along the way.  

 We can handle the uncertainty and anxiety of what might happen to our ancestral language by actively fighting for it — ensuring that it stays alive in our hearts.  

This is proof that what is lost can be rediscovered.  

The sip that was sour can turn sweet.  

**اردو زِنده باد**

---


